---
layout: post
title: Statics
---

Static is one of the [non-access modifier](/2015/05/22/access-control.html) which has a huge role in Java. It can be used
with both variables and methods. It is used when we want some variable or method not to be a part of any specific object
of a class rather common for all objects of the class. 

For example, keeping count of all the instances created for a particular class we can make the count variable `static` or 
when we have a method which returns the same result irrespective of the instance invoking it like `getRandom()` returning
any random number or `getMax(int x, int y)` returning the larger number between `x` and `y` we can make the methods `static`.

### Ways to access static variables/methods

As static variable/methods doesn't belong to any particular object of a class, you need not create any object to access 
static variable/method. You can access directly with the help of classname and dot `'.'` operator but you can also access
normally like any other instance variable/method i.e, via object reference and dot `'.'` operator. See below:

{% highlight java linenos %}
class Frog {

    static int frogCount = 0; // Declare and initialize
                              // static variable
    int frogSize = 0;

    public Frog() {
        frogCount += 1;  // Modify the value in the constructor
    }

    public static int getFrogCount() {
        return frogCount;
    }
    
    public int getFrogSize() {
        return frogSize;
    }

    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Frog f = new Frog();
        System.out.println(f.getFrogSize()); // Access instance
                                             // method via object reference f
        
        System.out.println(Frog.frogCount);  // Access static
                                             // variable via class 
        
        System.out.println(f.frogCount);  // Access static
                                          // variable via object reference f
                                          
        System.out.println(Frog.getFrogCount());  // Access static
                                                  // method via class 
                
        System.out.println(f.getFrogCount());  // Access static
                                               // method via object reference f
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

### Some points to remember here

1. Static method __cannot access__ a instance(non-static) variable.
{% highlight java linenos %}

{% endhighlight %}

2. Static method __cannot access__ a instance method.
{% highlight java linenos %}

{% endhighlight %}

3. Static method __can access__ a static variable or static method.

4. Static methods __cannot be overridden__. This is an important point. Consider the below program to understand:
{% highlight java linenos %}
class Animal {
    static void doStuff() {
        System.out.print("a ");
    }
}

class Dog extends Animal {
    
    // it's a redefinition,
    // not an override
    static void doStuff() {
        System.out.print("d ");
    }
    
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Animal[] a = {new Animal(), new Dog(), new Animal()};
        for (int x = 0; x < a.length; x++)
            a[x].doStuff();
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

