---
layout: post
title: Threads
published: false
---

A __Thread__ in Java means two different things:

* An instance of class `java.lang.Thread`
* A thread of execution

An __instance of Thread__ is just an object. Like any other object in Java, it has variables and methods, and lives and
dies on the heap. But a __thread of execution__ is an individual process (a "lightweight" process) that has its own call
stack.

In Java, there is one thread per call stack or you can say, one call stack per thread. Even if you don't create any new 
threads in your program, threads are back there running. The main() method, that starts the whole ball rolling, runs in
one thread, called (surprisingly) the main thread.

### Create a Thread in Java

Either of the 2 ways:

* Extend the `java.lang.Thread` class
* Implement the `Runnable` interface

Though extending the `Thread` class is simple, in real life applications implementing the `Runnable` interface is
the preferred way of creating threads. It's usually not a good OO practice to extend `Thread` because sub-classing 
should be reserved for specialized versions of more general superclasses. 

So the only time it really makes sense (from an OO perspective) to extend `Thread` is when you have a more specialized
version of a Thread class. In other words, because you have more specialized thread-specific behavior. And if you just
want a job to be done by a thread then you should design a class that implements the Runnable interface, which also 
leaves your class free to extend some other class.

### Define a Thread

* 




